Convert In-place Upgrade of SLES with SUSE Manager to the Workflow (#1559)
uyuni-project/uyuni-docs: modules/common-workflows/pages/workflow-inplace-sles-upgrade.adoc

[[workflow-inplace-sles-upgrade]]

> = In-place Upgrade of {sles} with {productname}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= In-place upgrade of {sles} with {productname}
```
Maybe, with new sections or chapters we can try to be consistent with capitalizing titles (= using sentence style)

> This workflow shows how to implement an automated way to complete the task of in-place {sles} instances upgrade using {productname} Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This workflow shows how to automatically complete the task of in-place {sles} instances upgrade with {productname} Server.
```

The workflow is applicable for both {salt} and {trad} clients.

== Use case

In-place migration is benefitial when:

* migrating large number of the older {sles} is time-consuming 
* you are looking for a way to automate migrations

== Outcome 

Successful completion of this workflow results in consistent, supportable outcomes.

== Step-by-step preparation instructions

[WARNING]
====

> This workflow is very complex and time-consuming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This workflow is complex and time-consuming.
```

Make sure that adequate testing is done before deploying the procedure in live environment.
====

> .Procedure: Prepare the {productname} Server for Provisioning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure: Prepare the {productname} Server for provisioning
```

[role=procedure]
. Create a SUSE Manager Content Lifecycle Management project for your distribution. 

>   Carefully choose a short-but-descriptive prefix in the name, including all source channel modules.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Choose a short-but-descriptive prefix in the name, including all source channel modules.  
```

>   Add Filters as needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Add Filters as needed.
```

>   Add at least one Environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Add at least one Environment.
```
Do we need to capitalize Environment here?

+
image::wf-inplaceMigration-01.png[scaledwidth=80%]
+

> . Create an Activation Key that includes the filtered project channels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create an Activation Key that includes the filtered project channels.
```

+
image::wf-inplaceMigration-02.png[scaledwidth=80%]
+

> . (Optional) Create a bootstrap script - although the profile will not need it, since it is managed in the AutoYaST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. (Optional) Create a bootstrap script.
  The profile will not need it, because it is managed in the {ay}.
```

. Create a [path]``/var/spacewalk/iso`` directory, and for SLES 15 SP2 and following, copy the [literal]``Full iso`` (>10 GB) there.  
  Create a mount point for it, such as [path]``/opt/install/15sp3`` and mount the ISO there.  
  Ensure this path gets re-mounted at boot time. 
. Create an Autoinstallation Distribution in {productname} for each base channel to which you will migrate.  
.. In the [guimenu]``Distribution``, reference the specific Base Channel to match the base to which you might migrate, for example the base channel of your CLM project Environment Lifecycle.  
.. Label [guimenu]``the Distribution`` something that references your specific Base Channel.  

> .. Set the [literal]``Installer Generation`` to match your specific version of {sles} (12,15,etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Set the [literal]``Installer Generation`` to match your specific version of {sles} (12, 15, etc.).
```

> .. The kernel options will be automatically populated when you click on [guimenu]``Create Autoinstallable Distribution``.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. The kernel options will be automatically populated when you click [guimenu]``Create Autoinstallable Distribution``.  
```

. You may create more [guimenu]``Distributions`` depending on the Base Channel you need to assign, and you can re-use the same [literal]``Tree Path`` for the boot media if required.
+
image::wf-inplaceMigration-03.png[scaledwidth=80%]
+

> . Click on [guimenu]``Profiles``, and upload Kickstart/Autoyast File for each target SLES distribution, service pack and channels you wish to migrate to.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click [guimenu]``Profiles``, and upload Kickstart/Autoyast File for each target SLES distribution, service pack, and channels you wish to migrate to.  
```

.. This profile will be associated with the activation key and autoinstallation distribution created above. 
.. Cut-and-paste a [literal]``Profile`` template as the basis for what you upload, assign it the [literal]``Autoinstall tree`` you created as a [literal]``Distribution`` above.  

> .. Do not put anything in the [literal]``Virtualizaton Type`` box, and select [btn]``Create``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Do not put anything in the [literal]``Virtualizaton Type`` box, and click btn:[Create].
```

. Once created, your profile will now have some new fields on this [guimenui]``Details`` page.  
  In the [literal]``Kernel Options`` line on this [literal]``Details`` page, put in
+
----
autoupgrade=1 insecure=1 useonlinerepo
----
+
. This will tell your profile to treat its install as an upgrade, and allow http access to the {productname} Server to obtain installer updates without needing to go to {scc}.
+
image::wf-inplaceMigration-04.png[scaledwidth=80%]
+

> . Click on the variables tab in your Autoinstallation Profile to specify CLM prefix, Activation Key, Distrotree, and Organization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the variables tab in your Autoinstallation Profile to specify CLM prefix, Activation Key, Distribution tree, and Organization:
```

+
image::wf-inplaceMigration-05.png[scaledwidth=80%]
+

Sample Variables:

* [literal]``registration_key=1-15sp1-demo-test``
* [literal]``org=1``
* [literal]``channel_prefix=15sp1-demo-test``
* [literal]``distrotree=15sp1-demo-test``

Edit the Autoyast profile itself in a tool where you can use cut-and-paste for the channels in your profile.  
Use variables in your profiles where possible.  

> Much time has gone into creating some useful profiles which can be used as a starting point. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Published profiles can be used as a starting point. 
```

[NOTE] 
====

> For profile files, go to https://github.com/SUSE/manager-build-profiles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For profile files, see https://github.com/SUSE/manager-build-profiles.
```

====

The profiles follow Autoyast xml guidelines, and for an in-place upgrade there are several important sections:

//=== Add-ons - the repositories used in the upgrade
Add-ons - the repositories used in the upgrade::

----
<listentry>
<ask_on_error config:type="boolean">true</ask_on_error>
#if $channel_prefix != ""
<media_url>https://$redhat_management_server/ks/dist/child/$channel_prefix-sle-manager-tools15-pool-$arch-sp3/$distrotree</media_url>
#else
<media_url>https://$redhat_management_server/ks/dist/child/sle-manager-tools15-pool-$arch-sp3/$distrotree</media_url>
#end if
<name>$channel_prefix SLE-15-Manager-Tools Pool</name>
<product>sle-manager-tools</product>
</listentry>
----

Be sure to include all (and only) the relevant modules (both Pool and Updates) to be used in the migration.
In migration, it is recommended to add all available modules, as the location of certain packages changes with new major versions.

After finishing the preparation, proceed with the actual migration depending on the type of your client.

> For {salt} clients, go to <<in-place-migration-salt-minions>>.
> 
> For {trad} clients, go to <<in-place-migration-traditional-clients>>. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For {salt} clients, go to <<in-place-migration-salt-minions>>.
* For {trad} clients, go to <<in-place-migration-traditional-clients>>. 
```
BTW, do we have a "{trad}" macro?

Author: We do.

[[in-place-migration-salt-minions]]

> == Migration of Salt minions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Migration of Salt clients
```

> Procedure: Migrating Salt minions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Procedure: Migrating Salt clients
```

Delete any that are unnecessary.
+
. Before provisioning, issue the following Remote Command to the systems you wish to upgrade to remove the existing {productname} channels during the upgrade process: 
+
----
rm -rf /etc/zypp/repos.d/susemanager*
----
+
. Assign your Autoinstallation Profile in [guimenu]``System Details → Provisioning`` for one system, or in the [literal]``Provisioning`` tab in SSM for as many systems as you need. 
  {productname} provisioning then auto-assigns a Reactivation Key to this system, that is referenced in the provisioning process.  
  If you need to perform the upgrade through a particular {productname} Proxy you will need to group just those systems together in SSM.
+
image::wf-inplaceMigration-06.png[scaledwidth=80%]
+
image::wf-inplaceMigration-07.png[scaledwidth=80%]

{productname} creates the proper entry in [path]``/etc/grub.d/`` for the reinstallation, and boots the selected systems to that entry.  
 The Profile you created above will be used to drive automated upgrade, following which your system will use the reactivation key (one time), associating the upgraded system with the previous {productname} profile.

> The Session Status screen in {productname} will not be updated real-time for {salt} minions.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Session Status screen in {productname} will not be updated real-time for {salt} clients.
```
